# racial-bias-detection
Language bias is a significant area of discussion when it comes to mass media. Another major area of mass media is sports coverage, and the accompanying commentary of live sporting events. Specifically when considering American football (henceforth “football”), -a sport that regularly draws tens of millions of viewers , studying racial biases in commentary is important. Implicit racial biases in sports commentary have predominantly been studied from a social sciences perspective - on small-scale datasets and subjective annotation of “racial” language. However, more recently, this area of research has garnered attention due to harmful impacts of implicit racial biases including involuntarily profiling and segregating marginalized groups. Iyyer et al conduct a major study into football commentary from 1960-2019, collected from YouTube videos of full games and have produced the dataset titled FOOTBALL [X]. Although their work affirms the conclusions of previous social science analyses (that point to the fact that commentators tend to compliment caucausian players for their strategy and intelligence while providing applause to colored players for their strength and other physical attributes), the simplistic NLP approaches applied lack the sophistication to handle the temporal as well as confounding characteristics of the data. For example, it was hard for their model to identify if a descriptive comment was in reference to a player’s physical characteristics or his position. We seek to apply modern NLP methods to improve upon some of the limitations highlighted by Iyyer et al and hence provide deeper insight into implicit racial bias in sports commentary.
